.TH VAL-SUB-INSTANCE 8 "2026-05-30" "vx-dga-l-val" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
val-sub-instance \- Lifecycle management for VAL sub-instances
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B val-sub-instance \-\-create
.I NAME
.RB [ \-\-vas
.IR URL
|
.B \-\-source
.BR vac ]
.br
.B val-sub-instance \-\-delete
.I NAME
.br
.B val-sub-instance \-\-list
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B val-sub-instance
creates, deletes, and lists
.BR val-sub (8)
instances. Each sub-instance can listen to a different VAS server or use
a different filter and set of hooks.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-create " NAME"
Creates a new sub-instance named
.IR NAME .
The configuration skeleton is copied from
.I /usr/share/val/instance-template/val.conf
and written to
.IR /etc/val/val.sub/NAME/ .
A
.I .enabled
marker is created so
.BR val-sub-manager (8)
starts the instance immediately on the next scan.
.TP
.BI \-\-vas " URL"
Set
.B VAS_HOST
in the new sub-instance configuration (implies
.BR SOURCE=vas ).
.TP
.B \-\-source vac
Set
.B SOURCE=vac
in the new sub-instance configuration.
.TP
.BI \-\-delete " NAME"
Removes the configuration and state for sub-instance
.IR NAME .
Aborts if the
.BR val-sub (8)
process is currently active.
.TP
.B \-\-list
Displays a table with each sub-instance's name, source, VAS host, and
current status.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/val/val.sub/NAME/val.conf
Sub-instance configuration.
.TP
.I /etc/val/val.sub/NAME/.enabled
Enables the sub-instance in
.BR val-sub-manager (8).
.TP
.I /var/lib/val/sub/NAME/
Runtime state directory.
.TP
.I /usr/share/val/instance-template/val.conf
Template used when creating new sub-instances.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR val-sub (8),
.BR val-sub-manager (8),
.BR val (8)
.SH AUTHOR
Gabriel Navia <correos@gabrielnav.es>
