.TH VAL 8 "2026-05-30" "vx-dga-l-val" "System Administration"
.SH NAME
val \- Versatile Autoregistration Listener
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B val
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B val
is a systemd service that watches the inventory version published by
.BR vas (8)
or cached locally by
.BR vac (8),
and distributes the filtered inventory to a set of hook scripts whenever
a change is detected.
.PP
On each cycle
.B val
compares its local version against the remote version. If they differ it
fetches the client list, optionally materialises per-key sub-views, runs
all executable scripts in
.IR HOOKS_DIR ,
and updates the local version file.
.SS Source modes
.TP
.B SOURCE=vas
Queries the VAS HTTP API directly.
Supports all
.B FILTER
values and
.B GLOBAL_KEY
filtering.
.TP
.B SOURCE=vac
Reads the inventory file written by
.BR vac (8)
at
.IR /var/lib/vac/ .
Only
.B active
clients are available; GLOBAL_KEY filtering is ignored.
.SS VAL-Aware push
When
.B BUMP_LISTEN_PORT
is set to a non-zero value,
.B val
opens a UDP socket on that port via
.BR nc (1).
Any incoming datagram interrupts the polling sleep and triggers an
immediate version check, reducing reaction latency from
.B CHECK_SECONDS
to milliseconds.
Requires
.BR netcat-openbsd .
.SH HOOK ENVIRONMENT
Each hook in
.I HOOKS_DIR
receives the inventory JSON on standard input (unless
.B DISPATCH_STDIN=false
) and the following environment variables:
.TP
.B VAL_VERSION
The new inventory version that triggered this dispatch.
.TP
.B VAL_FILTER
The active client filter.
.TP
.B VAL_SOURCE
The active source mode (vas or vac).
.TP
.B VAL_EXTRA_KEY
The global extra-key filter in effect, if any.
.TP
.B VAL_STATE_DIR
Path to the state directory where materialised key views are stored.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.B val
reads
.I /etc/val/val.conf
and overlays in
.IR /etc/val/val.conf.d/ .
Key variables:
.TP
.B SOURCE
Inventory source:
.B vas
(default) or
.BR vac .
.TP
.B VAS_HOST
VAS server hostname or IP (SOURCE=vas only). Port defaults to
.BR 8000 .
.TP
.B FILTER
Client status filter:
.B active
(default),
.BR inactive ,
.BR archived ,
or
.BR all .
.TP
.B CHECK_SECONDS
Polling interval in seconds (default:
.BR 300 ).
.TP
.B HOOKS_DIR
Directory of hook scripts (default:
.IR /etc/val/hooks.d ).
.TP
.B HOOK_TIMEOUT_SECONDS
Maximum execution time per hook in seconds;
.B 0
disables the timeout (default:
.BR 30 ).
.TP
.B GLOBAL_KEY
Filter the inventory to clients that have this key in either extra field
(SOURCE=vas only).
.TP
.B LOCAL_KEY_LIST
Space-separated list of keys for which
.IR KEY _clients.json
sub-views are materialised in
.IR VAL_STATE_DIR .
.TP
.B DISPATCH_STDIN
Send the inventory JSON to hooks via standard input (default:
.BR true ).
.TP
.B BUMP_LISTEN_PORT
UDP port for VAL-Aware push notifications;
.B 0
disables (default:
.BR 9876
on fresh install).
.TP
.B PARALLEL_MODE
Controls sub-instance parallelism:
.B both
(default),
.BR only_parallel ,
or
.BR only_main .
.TP
.B LOG_LEVEL
Log verbosity:
.B no
|
.B normal
|
.B debug
(default:
.BR normal ).
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /etc/val/val.conf
Main configuration file.
.TP
.I /etc/val/val.conf.d/
Drop-in configuration overlays.
.TP
.I /etc/val/hooks.d/
Hook scripts executed on each inventory change.
.TP
.I /var/lib/val/version
Local inventory version.
.TP
.I /var/lib/val/clients.json
Last fetched inventory.
.TP
.I /var/lib/val/KEY_clients.json
Materialised sub-view for each key in
.BR LOCAL_KEY_LIST .
.TP
.I /usr/share/val/val.conf.defaults
Reference copy of all configuration variables with documentation.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR val-sub (8),
.BR val-sub-manager (8),
.BR val-sub-instance (8),
.BR vas (8),
.BR vac (8),
.BR systemctl (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Gabriel Navia <correos@gabrielnav.es>
